Welcome to Anaesthesia Compendium. Today's viva station:
the gas laws and the behaviour of gases. I shall take the candidate through it,
question by question. Let us begin.
Let us begin. What is a gas, and why does the behaviour of gases matter so much in
anaesthesia?
A gas is a state of matter in which the molecules are widely separated,
move freely and rapidly at high speed in random directions,
and exert pressure by their collisions with the walls of their container,
having neither a fixed shape nor a fixed volume but expanding to fill whatever
space is available.
This molecular freedom distinguishes gases from liquids and solids and gives rise
to the relationships, the gas laws, that describe how their pressure, volume,
temperature and amount are interrelated.
The behaviour of gases matters profoundly in anaesthesia because our practice is
conducted largely through gases and vapours: we store oxygen,
nitrous oxide and air in cylinders and pipelines under pressure;
we deliver anaesthetic agents as vapours;
we measure gas pressures and concentrations constantly;
and the patient's own respiratory physiology is the movement and exchange of gases.
Understanding the gas laws allows us to predict how a gas will behave when its
conditions change — how the contents of a cylinder relate to its pressure,
how a gas cools when it expands, how the volume of a gas-filled space changes with
pressure or temperature, and how partial pressures relate to concentrations.
These principles underpin the safe storage and delivery of medical gases,
the function of anaesthetic equipment,
and the interpretation of respiratory and blood-gas measurement.
So a gas is matter whose freely moving molecules exert pressure by collision and
fill their container, and the gas laws describing its behaviour are fundamental to
anaesthesia because so much of our practice involves the storage, delivery,
measurement and exchange of gases and vapours.
State and explain Boyle's law.
Boyle's law describes the relationship between the pressure and the volume of a
fixed mass of gas at constant temperature,
and it is one of the three classical gas laws.
The law states that, for a fixed mass of gas at constant temperature,
the volume is inversely proportional to the pressure — so that if the pressure is
doubled, the volume halves, and if the pressure is halved, the volume doubles.
Expressed another way, the product of the pressure and the volume is a constant at
constant temperature.
The molecular explanation is straightforward:
pressure arises from molecular collisions with the container walls,
so if the gas is compressed into a smaller volume,
the same number of molecules collide with a smaller wall area more frequently,
raising the pressure proportionately.
Boyle's law has several practical applications in anaesthesia.
It underlies the relationship between the pressure and volume of gas in a cylinder,
allowing the estimation of cylinder contents — though this applies strictly to
gases that are not liquefied.
It governs the behaviour of a gas-filled space subjected to changing pressure,
such as the expansion of a gas pocket as ambient pressure falls at altitude or in a
hyperbaric chamber, and the compression of the lungs and of gas-filled cavities.
It also features in some methods of measuring lung volumes by gas compression.
So Boyle's law states that at constant temperature the volume of a fixed mass of
gas is inversely proportional to its pressure, their product being constant,
which underlies cylinder contents, the behaviour of gas spaces under changing
pressure, and certain measurements of lung volume.
Now Charles's law.
Charles's law describes the relationship between the volume and the temperature of
a fixed mass of gas at constant pressure, the second of the classical gas laws.
The law states that, for a fixed mass of gas at constant pressure,
the volume is directly proportional to the absolute temperature — so that heating
the gas expands it and cooling it contracts it, in direct proportion,
provided the temperature is measured on the absolute kelvin scale.
The molecular explanation is that raising the temperature increases the average
kinetic energy and speed of the molecules,
so that to keep the pressure constant the gas must expand,
increasing the volume over which the more energetic collisions are distributed.
It is essential that temperature be expressed in kelvin,
because the proportionality holds only from absolute zero;
using Celsius would give nonsensical results,
since the volume does not double when the Celsius temperature doubles but when the
absolute temperature does.
Charles's law explains why a gas expands on warming and contracts on cooling,
relevant to the changes in volume of gases as they are warmed from cylinder or
pipeline temperature to body temperature,
and to the calibration and correction of gas-volume measurements to standard
conditions.
It is part of the reasoning behind expressing gas volumes at a defined temperature
and pressure.
So Charles's law states that at constant pressure the volume of a fixed mass of gas
is directly proportional to its absolute temperature,
reflecting the increased molecular energy on heating,
and it requires the use of the kelvin scale and explains the thermal expansion and
contraction of gases.
And the third gas law, relating pressure and temperature.
The third classical gas law, sometimes called Gay-Lussac's law or the pressure law,
describes the relationship between the pressure and the temperature of a fixed mass
of gas at constant volume.
The law states that, for a fixed mass of gas held at constant volume,
the pressure is directly proportional to the absolute temperature — so that heating
the gas raises its pressure and cooling it lowers its pressure,
in direct proportion, again provided temperature is measured in kelvin.
The molecular explanation is that raising the temperature increases the speed and
kinetic energy of the molecules, so that in a fixed volume they strike the walls
harder and more often, raising the pressure.
This law has direct and important safety implications in anaesthesia.
The pressure within a sealed, fixed-volume container of gas — such as a cylinder —
rises if the cylinder is heated and falls if it is cooled;
thus a full cylinder exposed to heat, as in a fire,
will develop a dangerously high pressure,
and conversely the pressure read from a cylinder is affected by its temperature.
It also explains the cooling and the pressure changes associated with the filling
and emptying of cylinders. The three classical laws together are special cases of
the more general combined and ideal gas relationships.
So the pressure law states that at constant volume the pressure of a fixed mass of
gas is directly proportional to its absolute temperature,
with the important safety implication that the pressure in a fixed-volume container
rises with heating, as when a cylinder is exposed to fire.
How are these combined into the ideal gas law?
The three classical gas laws, each holding one variable constant,
can be combined into a single expression,
and with the introduction of the amount of gas this becomes the ideal gas law,
the fundamental equation describing the behaviour of an ideal gas.
Combining Boyle's, Charles's and the pressure law gives the combined gas law:
for a fixed mass of gas, the product of pressure and volume divided by the absolute
temperature is constant, so that any change in two of the variables determines the
third.
Incorporating the amount of gas, in moles,
and the universal gas constant yields the ideal gas equation,
which states that the pressure multiplied by the volume equals the amount of gas in
moles multiplied by the universal gas constant multiplied by the absolute
temperature.
This single equation relates all four properties of a gas — pressure, volume,
amount and temperature — and contains the three classical laws as special cases
obtained by holding one variable fixed.
Its value is that it allows the complete prediction of how a gas will behave under
any change of conditions, and it underlies, for example,
the calculation of cylinder contents,
the relationship between the moles of gas and the volume it occupies,
and the standardisation of gas volumes.
An ideal gas is a theoretical gas whose molecules have negligible volume and no
intermolecular forces, which the equation assumes.
So the combined and ideal gas laws unite pressure, volume,
amount and temperature in a single relationship — pressure times volume equals
moles times the gas constant times absolute temperature — that predicts gas
behaviour under any conditions and contains the classical laws as special cases.
Real gases depart from ideal behaviour. When and why?
An ideal gas is a theoretical construct,
and real gases deviate from ideal behaviour under certain conditions,
which is clinically important because some of the gases we use most depart
significantly from the ideal, particularly when stored under pressure.
The ideal gas law assumes two things that are not strictly true of real gases:
that the molecules themselves occupy negligible volume,
and that there are no attractive or repulsive forces between them.
Real molecules do have a finite size and do exert intermolecular forces.
These assumptions hold well when the gas is dilute — at low pressure and high
temperature, where molecules are far apart,
their own volume is negligible and the forces between them are weak.
Deviation becomes significant at high pressure and low temperature,
where the molecules are crowded close together:
their finite volume becomes a appreciable fraction of the total,
and the intermolecular attractive forces become significant,
so the gas no longer obeys the ideal law and may begin to liquefy.
The clinical relevance is considerable.
Nitrous oxide in a cylinder is stored under such pressure that it is partly
liquefied — it is a real gas behaving very non-ideally — which is why its cylinder
pressure does not reflect its contents in the way Boyle's law would predict for an
ideal gas.
The critical temperature concept formalises when a gas can be liquefied by pressure.
So real gases deviate from ideal behaviour at high pressure and low temperature,
where molecular volume and intermolecular forces matter,
and this is clinically crucial for understanding the non-ideal,
partly-liquefied behaviour of gases such as nitrous oxide in cylinders.
Explain critical temperature and its relevance to medical gases.
The critical temperature is a fundamental property of any gas that determines
whether it can be liquefied by pressure alone,
and it is central to understanding how the medical gases are stored.
The critical temperature is defined as the temperature above which a substance
cannot be liquefied by the application of pressure, however great;
below the critical temperature, sufficient pressure will liquefy the gas,
but above it the substance remains gaseous no matter how high the pressure.
The related critical pressure is the pressure required to liquefy the gas at its
critical temperature. This concept explains the contrasting behaviour of our
medical gases.
Oxygen has a critical temperature far below room temperature,
at about minus one hundred and eighteen degrees Celsius,
so at room temperature oxygen cannot be liquefied by pressure and remains a gas in
the cylinder, however highly compressed;
its cylinder pressure therefore falls steadily as it empties,
in accordance with Boyle's law.
Nitrous oxide, by contrast, has a critical temperature of about thirty-six point
five degrees Celsius, which is above normal room temperature,
so at room temperature it can be and is liquefied by pressure,
and a nitrous oxide cylinder contains liquid in equilibrium with vapour.
Carbon dioxide similarly has a critical temperature around thirty-one degrees.
To store oxygen as a liquid, it must be kept below its critical temperature,
which is why liquid oxygen is stored at very low temperature in vacuum-insulated
vessels.
So the critical temperature is the temperature above which a gas cannot be
liquefied by pressure, and it explains why oxygen is stored as a compressed gas
while nitrous oxide, with a critical temperature above room temperature,
is stored as a liquid under pressure.
Why does the pressure gauge of a nitrous oxide cylinder not indicate its contents,
whereas an oxygen gauge does?
The contrasting behaviour of the oxygen and nitrous oxide cylinder gauges is a
direct and clinically important consequence of whether the gas is stored as a
compressed gas or as a liquid, which in turn depends on its critical temperature.
In an oxygen cylinder, the oxygen is entirely gaseous,
because its critical temperature is far below room temperature.
As oxygen is drawn off, the number of gas molecules in the fixed cylinder volume
falls, and by Boyle's law the pressure falls proportionately.
The pressure gauge therefore gives a reliable,
linear indication of the remaining contents:
a half-full oxygen cylinder reads about half its full pressure,
and the contents can be calculated.
In a nitrous oxide cylinder, by contrast,
the nitrous oxide is stored mostly as liquid in equilibrium with its vapour,
because its critical temperature is above room temperature.
As gas is drawn off, liquid evaporates to replace it,
keeping the vapour pressure constant as long as any liquid remains;
the gauge therefore reads a roughly constant pressure — the saturated vapour
pressure — and does not fall as the cylinder empties,
giving no indication of the contents until almost all the liquid is gone,
whereupon the pressure finally falls.
The contents of a nitrous oxide cylinder must therefore be determined by weighing
it, the weight of nitrous oxide being the difference from the empty cylinder weight.
So the oxygen gauge indicates contents because the gas is compressed and obeys
Boyle's law, whereas the nitrous oxide gauge reads a constant vapour pressure while
liquid remains and so does not indicate contents,
which must instead be found by weighing.
Describe Dalton's law of partial pressures.
Dalton's law of partial pressures concerns mixtures of gases,
and it is fundamental to the expression of gas concentrations and to respiratory
and blood-gas physiology.
The law states that in a mixture of gases that do not chemically react,
each gas exerts a partial pressure equal to the pressure it would exert if it alone
occupied the whole volume, and the total pressure of the mixture is the sum of the
partial pressures of its component gases.
Each gas behaves independently, contributing to the total pressure in proportion to
its fractional amount. Thus the partial pressure of any gas in a mixture is its
fractional concentration multiplied by the total pressure.
This law is indispensable in anaesthesia and respiratory physiology.
The partial pressure of oxygen in dry air, for example,
is its fractional concentration of about twenty-one per cent multiplied by
atmospheric pressure, giving about twenty-one kilopascals at sea level.
The partial pressures of oxygen and carbon dioxide in the alveoli and the blood,
which drive their diffusion and which we measure in blood gases,
are understood through Dalton's law.
It explains why the partial pressure of inspired oxygen falls at altitude,
where the total pressure falls although the fractional concentration is unchanged,
and conversely why partial pressures rise in a hyperbaric chamber.
It also underlies the calculation of the partial pressures of anaesthetic vapours
in gas mixtures.
So Dalton's law states that each gas in a mixture exerts a partial pressure
independently, the total being their sum,
with each partial pressure equal to the fractional concentration times the total
pressure — the basis of expressing gas concentrations as partial pressures and of
understanding alveolar and blood gas tensions and the effect of altitude.
Explain the universal gas constant and standard conditions for expressing gas
volume.
The universal gas constant and the convention of standard conditions are two
related ideas that allow gas quantities and volumes to be expressed precisely and
comparably.
The universal gas constant is the constant of proportionality in the ideal gas
equation, relating the product of pressure and volume to the product of the amount
of gas in moles and the absolute temperature;
it has the same value for all ideal gases,
which is the remarkable fact that gives the law its universality and reflects that
equal volumes of different gases at the same temperature and pressure contain equal
numbers of molecules — Avogadro's principle.
From it follows the result that one mole of an ideal gas occupies a fixed volume at
a defined temperature and pressure,
about twenty-two point four litres at zero degrees Celsius and standard atmospheric
pressure.
Because the volume of a gas depends on its temperature and pressure,
a stated gas volume is meaningless unless the conditions are specified,
which is why standard conditions are defined.
Several conventions exist: standard temperature and pressure, and,
in respiratory physiology, conventions such as body temperature and pressure
saturated with water vapour, used for expressing lung volumes as they exist in the
body, and standard temperature and pressure dry, used for expressing amounts of gas.
Converting volumes between these conditions, using the gas laws,
is necessary for accurate respiratory measurement.
So the universal gas constant is the common proportionality constant of the ideal
gas law for all gases, underlying the fixed molar volume,
and standard conditions are defined reference temperatures and pressures — such as
body temperature and pressure saturated — needed to express gas volumes
meaningfully and to convert between them.
What is the kinetic theory of gases, and what does it explain?
The kinetic theory of gases is the molecular model that underlies and explains the
gas laws, accounting for the macroscopic behaviour of gases in terms of the motion
of their molecules.
The theory makes several assumptions about an ideal gas:
that a gas consists of a very large number of tiny molecules in constant, rapid,
random motion; that these molecules are so small that their own volume is
negligible compared with the space they occupy;
that they exert no forces on one another except during collisions;
and that collisions between molecules and with the container walls are perfectly
elastic, losing no energy.
From these assumptions the theory derives the gas laws and explains their molecular
basis. Pressure is explained as the result of the countless collisions of molecules
with the container walls, each collision exerting a tiny force.
Temperature is explained as a measure of the average kinetic energy of the
molecules — the hotter the gas, the faster its molecules move.
From this, Boyle's law follows because compressing the gas increases the frequency
of wall collisions; Charles's and the pressure laws follow because heating
increases molecular speed and so the force and frequency of collisions.
The theory also explains diffusion,
the gradual mixing of gases through molecular motion,
and the relationship between molecular mass and speed,
lighter molecules moving faster.
So the kinetic theory models a gas as many tiny molecules in rapid random motion,
with pressure arising from their collisions and temperature reflecting their
average kinetic energy, and from this it explains the gas laws, diffusion,
and the dependence of molecular speed on mass.
Describe the adiabatic process and where it is relevant in anaesthesia.
An adiabatic process is a change in the state of a gas that occurs without any
exchange of heat with the surroundings,
and it is relevant in anaesthesia because it explains temperature changes that
accompany the rapid compression or expansion of gases.
In an adiabatic process, because no heat enters or leaves,
any work done on or by the gas changes its internal energy and therefore its
temperature.
When a gas is rapidly compressed adiabatically,
the work done on it increases its internal energy and the gas heats up;
when a gas rapidly expands adiabatically,
it does work and its internal energy and temperature fall, so the gas cools.
The qualifier rapid is important, because a slow process would allow heat to be
exchanged with the surroundings, keeping the temperature constant — an isothermal
process — whereas a sufficiently rapid change behaves adiabatically.
This principle has several anaesthetic relevances.
The rapid opening of a cylinder valve causes adiabatic compression of the gas
downstream, which can generate enough heat to ignite any contaminant such as oil or
grease in the presence of oxygen — a fire and explosion hazard,
which is why oxygen equipment must be kept free of oil and valves opened slowly.
Conversely, the rapid expansion of a gas as it leaves a cylinder or regulator
causes adiabatic cooling, which can cause frosting of regulators and is part of the
cooling seen with high gas flows.
So an adiabatic process is a change without heat exchange,
in which rapid compression heats a gas and rapid expansion cools it,
relevant to the ignition hazard of rapidly pressurising oxygen and to the cooling
and frosting of regulators.
What is the Joule-Thomson effect, and where does it feature?
The Joule-Thomson effect, sometimes called the Joule-Kelvin effect,
describes the temperature change that occurs when a real gas expands through a
restriction from a region of high pressure to one of low pressure without doing
external work, and it features in the handling and liquefaction of gases.
When a real gas expands through a narrow orifice or porous plug in this way,
most gases cool, because energy is expended in overcoming the intermolecular
attractive forces as the molecules move apart — a property of real gases not
predicted for an ideal gas, which would show no temperature change.
The size and even the direction of the effect depend on the gas and its starting
temperature relative to a characteristic inversion temperature.
The effect is distinct from simple adiabatic expansion, though both produce cooling.
Its principal relevance is industrial and clinical in the liquefaction of gases:
the repeated expansion and cooling of a gas by the Joule-Thomson effect is one of
the methods used to cool gases sufficiently to liquefy them,
as in the production of liquid oxygen and the liquefaction of air to separate its
components.
It also contributes to the cooling observed when compressed gases are released
through regulators and valves.
So the Joule-Thomson effect is the cooling, in most gases,
that accompanies their expansion through a restriction without doing external work,
arising from the intermolecular forces of real gases,
and it is used in the liquefaction of gases such as oxygen and contributes to the
cooling of released compressed gases.
Apply the gas laws to the contents and behaviour of an oxygen cylinder.
The oxygen cylinder provides a clear practical application of the gas laws,
and being able to work with its contents and behaviour is an everyday clinical
requirement.
Oxygen, having a critical temperature far below room temperature,
is stored entirely as a compressed gas,
typically at a pressure of around one hundred and thirty-seven bar when full in a
standard cylinder.
Because the oxygen is gaseous, Boyle's law applies,
so the pressure is directly proportional to the contents: as oxygen is used,
the pressure falls in proportion, and the gauge gives a reliable indication of the
remaining volume.
The volume of gas available at atmospheric pressure can be estimated from the
cylinder's internal volume and its pressure,
since the product of pressure and volume is constant — a small cylinder at high
pressure holds a large volume of gas when expanded to atmospheric pressure.
This allows the practical calculation of how long a cylinder will last at a given
flow rate: dividing the available volume of gas by the flow gives the duration,
an essential calculation during transfer of a patient.
The pressure law reminds us that the gauge pressure varies with temperature,
and that heating a cylinder raises its pressure dangerously.
The rapid opening of the valve risks adiabatic heating and the oil ignition hazard.
So the oxygen cylinder applies Boyle's law,
its pressure indicating contents and allowing calculation of the available gas
volume and the duration of supply at a given flow,
with the pressure law and adiabatic heating governing its safe handling — practical
gas-law reasoning used routinely, especially during patient transfer.
Now contrast the behaviour of a nitrous oxide cylinder, including the filling ratio.
The nitrous oxide cylinder behaves quite differently from the oxygen cylinder,
and understanding it requires the concepts of critical temperature,
vapour pressure and the filling ratio.
Because nitrous oxide has a critical temperature above room temperature,
it is stored as a liquid in equilibrium with its vapour.
The pressure in the cylinder is the saturated vapour pressure of nitrous oxide,
around forty-four bar at room temperature,
and this pressure remains constant as gas is withdrawn,
because liquid evaporates to maintain the vapour as long as any liquid remains;
only when the liquid is exhausted does the pressure begin to fall.
Hence, as noted, the gauge does not indicate contents,
which must be found by weighing. Two further phenomena are important.
First, as nitrous oxide is drawn off,
the latent heat of vaporisation needed to evaporate the liquid cools the cylinder,
which can lower the vapour pressure and cause frosting of the cylinder,
reducing the delivered pressure at high flows.
Second, the filling ratio: cylinders are deliberately not filled completely with
liquid but to a defined filling ratio — the weight of nitrous oxide divided by the
weight of water that would fill the cylinder — typically about seventy-five per
cent in temperate climates and lower in hot climates.
This is a safety measure, because if a cylinder were overfilled and then warmed,
the expanding liquid could fill the cylinder completely and generate dangerously
high pressures.
So the nitrous oxide cylinder holds liquid at its saturated vapour pressure,
which stays constant until the liquid is gone, cools by latent heat as it empties,
and is filled only to a defined filling ratio to prevent dangerous pressure rise on
warming.
What is the latent heat of vaporisation,
and how does it affect gas and vapour delivery?
The latent heat of vaporisation is the energy required to convert a substance from
the liquid to the vapour state without any change in temperature,
and it is important in anaesthesia because the vaporisation of liquid anaesthetic
agents and of liquefied gases cools them, affecting their delivery.
When a liquid evaporates, the molecules that escape into the vapour are the most
energetic, and energy must be supplied to break the intermolecular bonds holding
them in the liquid; this energy, taken from the remaining liquid and its
surroundings, is the latent heat of vaporisation,
and because it is drawn from the liquid the liquid cools as it evaporates.
This cooling has direct consequences. In a nitrous oxide cylinder,
as the liquid evaporates to supply gas, the latent heat cools the cylinder,
lowering the vapour pressure and the delivered flow at high usage,
and causing frosting.
In an anaesthetic vaporiser, the volatile agent evaporating from the liquid cools
the liquid, which would progressively reduce the amount of vapour produced and so
the delivered concentration; vaporisers are therefore designed with temperature
compensation and are constructed of materials with high thermal capacity and
conductivity to draw heat from the surroundings and maintain a stable temperature,
keeping the output constant.
The latent heat is also the principle behind cooling by evaporation more generally.
So the latent heat of vaporisation is the energy needed to turn liquid into vapour,
drawn from the liquid so that evaporation cools it,
which lowers the output of nitrous oxide cylinders at high flow and would
destabilise vaporiser output were it not for the temperature compensation built
into vaporiser design.
Comment on the flow of gases through the equipment we use,
in relation to gas properties.
The flow of gases through anaesthetic equipment depends on the properties of the
gas and on the nature of the passage, and although flow is a topic in itself,
certain gas properties bear directly on it.
Gases flow from regions of higher to lower pressure,
and the relationship between the driving pressure and the resulting flow depends on
whether the flow is laminar or turbulent.
Laminar flow, occurring at lower flow rates and in smooth tubes, is orderly,
and its rate is governed by the driving pressure and the viscosity of the gas.
Turbulent flow, occurring at higher flow rates, through constrictions,
or in branching and irregular passages, is disorderly,
and its rate depends instead on the density of the gas.
The two relevant gas properties are therefore viscosity,
which governs laminar flow, and density, which governs turbulent flow.
This distinction has practical consequences:
in conditions of turbulent flow through a narrow airway,
a low-density gas mixture such as helium with oxygen can improve flow,
because turbulent flow improves as density falls.
The behaviour of flowmeters, the bobbin or float of the rotameter depending on both
viscosity and density at different flow ranges, also reflects these properties.
The nature of the flow through an orifice, where flow depends largely on density,
contrasts with that through a tube.
So the flow of gases through our equipment depends on the gas's viscosity in
laminar flow and its density in turbulent flow,
which explains the benefit of low-density helium mixtures in turbulent airway
obstruction and the design and behaviour of flowmeters.
How do the gas laws explain the effects of altitude and hyperbaric conditions?
The gas laws explain the physiological and equipment effects of changes in ambient
pressure, as occur at altitude and in hyperbaric environments,
and this has practical relevance for patient transfer,
flight and hyperbaric medicine.
At altitude, the total atmospheric pressure falls,
although the fractional concentration of oxygen in air remains the same at about
twenty-one per cent.
By Dalton's law, since the partial pressure of oxygen is its fractional
concentration multiplied by the total pressure,
the partial pressure of inspired oxygen falls as the total pressure falls,
which is the cause of the hypoxia of altitude despite the unchanged oxygen
percentage.
By Boyle's law, the fall in ambient pressure causes any enclosed gas space to
expand — relevant to gas trapped in body cavities, in the middle ear, in the gut,
in a pneumothorax, or in the cuff of a tracheal tube,
all of which expand as pressure falls during ascent or flight and may cause harm;
this is why a pneumothorax is dangerous in flight and why tracheal cuffs may need
adjustment.
Conversely, in a hyperbaric chamber the raised total pressure increases the partial
pressure of inspired oxygen, allowing very high oxygen tensions to be achieved for
therapy, while by Boyle's law gas spaces are compressed,
relevant to the management of decompression and of trapped gas.
So the gas laws explain that altitude lowers the partial pressure of inspired
oxygen through Dalton's law, causing hypoxia,
and expands gas spaces through Boyle's law,
while hyperbaric conditions raise oxygen partial pressure and compress gas spaces —
all of direct relevance to transfer, flight and hyperbaric therapy.
Finally, draw together the relevance of the gas laws to anaesthetic practice.
Drawing the station together, the gas laws and the behaviour of gases are
foundational to anaesthesia because our specialty is conducted so largely through
the storage, delivery, measurement and exchange of gases and vapours,
and a secure grasp of these principles underlies the safe use of our equipment and
the interpretation of our measurements.
The classical laws — Boyle's relating pressure and volume,
Charles's relating volume and temperature,
and the pressure law relating pressure and temperature — combine into the ideal gas
law relating pressure, volume, amount and temperature,
while the kinetic theory explains them at the molecular level.
From these flow the practical themes.
The contrasting storage of oxygen as a compressed gas and nitrous oxide as a
liquid, determined by their critical temperatures,
explains why the oxygen gauge indicates contents while the nitrous oxide gauge does
not, and underlies the filling ratio and the cooling of cylinders by latent heat.
Dalton's law of partial pressures underlies the expression of gas concentrations,
the tensions that drive gas exchange,
and the effects of altitude and hyperbaric conditions on inspired oxygen.
The adiabatic and Joule-Thomson effects explain temperature changes and the oxygen
ignition hazard. Real-gas behaviour,
viscosity and density govern the flow of gases through our equipment.
So the gas laws are not abstract physics but the working principles behind
cylinders and pipelines, vaporisers and flowmeters,
blood gases and the effects of pressure — indispensable to safe and understanding
anaesthetic practice.
Thank you. An excellent and complete account. Let us stop there.
Before we close, here are the take-home messages.
First, The classical gas laws - Boyle's (pressure inversely proportional to volume
at constant temperature), Charles's (volume proportional to absolute temperature at
constant pressure) and the pressure law (pressure proportional to absolute
temperature at constant volume) - combine into the ideal gas law:
pressure times volume equals moles times the gas constant times absolute
temperature.
Second, Critical temperature is the temperature above which a gas cannot be
liquefied by pressure: oxygen (critical temperature far below room temperature) is
stored as a compressed gas whose gauge indicates contents (Boyle's law),
whereas nitrous oxide (critical temperature 36.5 degrees Celsius) is stored as
liquid at constant vapour pressure,
so its gauge does not indicate contents - weigh it instead.
Third, Dalton's law: each gas in a mixture exerts a partial pressure equal to its
fractional concentration times the total pressure,
and the total is their sum - the basis of partial pressures, gas-exchange tensions,
and why altitude lowers inspired oxygen partial pressure though the percentage is
unchanged.
4.
Latent heat of vaporisation cools a liquid as it evaporates - cooling nitrous oxide
cylinders at high flow and necessitating temperature compensation in vaporisers;
adiabatic compression heats gas (the oxygen-plus-oil ignition hazard) and adiabatic
and Joule-Thomson expansion cool it.
Fourth, Gas flow depends on viscosity in laminar flow and density in turbulent flow
(hence low-density helium-oxygen helps turbulent airway obstruction);
the nitrous oxide filling ratio (about 0.75) prevents dangerous pressure rise on
warming.
Thank you. That concludes the station.